PREFACE xix

much more radical ‘materialist’ claim that a complete notional
determination of an entity - to which one would only have to add ‘being’
in order to arrive at its existence - is in itself an abstract notion, an empty
abstract possibility. The lack of (a certain mode of} being is always also an
inherent lack of some notional determination - say, for a thing to exist as
part of opaque material reality, a whole set of notional conditions-
determinations have to be met(and other determinations have tobelacking).
With regard to 100 thalers (or any other empirical object), this means that
theirnotional determination is abstract, which is why they possessan opaque
empirical being and not full actuality. So when Kant drawsa parallel between
God and the 100 thalers, one should ask a simple and naive question: does
Kant really possess a (fully developed) concept of God?

This brings us to the true finesse of Hegel’s argumentation, which is
directed in two ways, both against Kant and against Anselm’s classic version
of the ontological proof of God. Hegel’s argument against Anselm’s proof
isnot thatit is too conceptual, but that it is not conceptual enough: Anselm
does not develop the concept of God, he just refers to it as the sum of all
perfections which, as such, is precisely beyond the comprehension of our
finite human minds. Anselm merely presupposes ‘God’ as an impenetrable
reality beyond our comprehension (ie., outside the notional domain), in
other words, his God is precisely not a concept (something posited by our
conceptual work), but a purely presupposed pre- or non-conceptual reality.
Along the same lines, albeit in the opposite sense, one should note the
irony in the fact that Kant talks about thalers, that is, about money, whose
existence as money is not ‘objective’, but depends on ‘notional’
determinations. It is true, as Kant says, that having a concept of 100 thalers
is not the same as having them in your pocket; but let us imagine a process
of rapid inflation which totally devalues the 100 thalers in your pocket;
in this case, the same object is there in reality, but it is no longer money,
having become a meaningless and worthless coin. In other words, money
is precisely an object whose status depends on how we ‘think’ about it: if
people no longer treat this piece of metal as money, if they no longer
‘believe’ in it as money, it no longer is money.
