PREFACE xi

of fetishizing abstraction: from a dialectical perspective, one should see
not just the thing in front of oneself, but this thing as it is embedded in
all the wealth of its concrete historical context. This, however, is the most
dangerous trap to be avoided; for Hegel, the true problem is precisely the
opposite one: the fact that, when we observe a thing, we see too much in
it, we fall under the spell of the wealth of empirical detail which prevents
us from clearly perceiving the notional determination which forms the
core of the thing. The problem is thus not that of how to grasp the
multiplicity of determinations, but rather of how to abstract from them,
how to constrain our gaze and teach it to grasp only the notional
determination.

Hegel’s formulation is here very precise: the reduction to the signifying
‘unary feature’ contracts actuality to possibility, in the precise Platonic
sense in which the notion (idea) of a thing always has a deontological
dimension to it, designating what the thing should become in order to be fully
what it is. ‘Potentiality’ is thus not simply the name for the essence of a
thing actualized in the multitude of empirical things (the idea of a chair
as a potentiality actualized in empirical chairs). The multitude ofa thing’s
actual properties is not simply reduced to the inner core of this thing’s
‘true reality’; what is more important is that the signifying reduction
accentuates (profiles) the thing’s inner potential. When I call someone ‘my
teacher’, I thereby outline the horizon of what I expect from him; when
I refer to a thing as ‘chair’, I profile the way I intend to use it in future.
When I observe the world around me through the lenses of a language, I
perceive its actuality through the lenses of the potentialities hidden,
latently present, in it. What this means is that potentiality appears ‘as
such’, becomes actual as potentiality, only through language: it is the
appellation of a thing that brings to light (‘posits’) its potentials.

Once we grasp Aufhebung in this way, we can immediately see what is
wrong with one of the main topics of the pseudo-Freudian dismissal of
Hegel: the notion of Hegel’s System as being the highest and most
overblown expression of an oral economy. Is not the Hegelian Idea effec-
tively a voracious devourer which ‘swallows up’ every object it comes
