PREFACE xvii

The Idea, namely, in positing itself as absolute unity of the pure Notion
and its reality and thus contracting itselfinto the immediacy of being,
is the totality in this form - nature.”

But this determination has not issued from a process of becoming, nor
is it a transition, as when above, the subjective Notion in its totality
becomes objectivity, and the sub jective end becomes life. On the contrary,
the pure Idea in which the determinateness or reality of the Notion is
itself raised into Notion, is an absolute liberation for which there is no
longer any immediate determination that is not equally posited and itself
Notion; in this freedom, therefore, no transition takes place; the simple
being to which the Idea determines itself remains perfectly transparent
to it and is the Notion that, in its determination, abides with itself. The
passage is therefore to be understood here rather in this manner, that
the Idea freely releases itself in its absolute self-assurance andinner poise.
By reason of this freedom, the form of its determinateness is also utterly
free - the externality of space and time existing absolutely on its own
account without the moment of subjectivity.’ Hegel repeatedly insists
here on this ‘absolute liberation’ being thoroughly different from the
standard dialectical ‘transition’. But how? The suspicion lurks that Hegel’s
‘absolute liberation’ relies on the absolute mediation of all otherness: I
set the Other free only af ter have completely internalized it. .. However,
is this really the case?

One should here reread Lacan’s critique of Hegel: what if, far from
denying what Lacan calls the ‘sub jective disjunction’, Hegel on the contrary
asserts a previously unheard-of division that runs through the (particular)
subject as well as through the (universal) substantial order of ‘collectivity’, uniting
the two? That is to say, what if the ‘reconciliation’ between the Particular
and the Universal occurs precisely through the division that cuts across
the two? The basic ‘postmodern’ reproach to Hegel - that his dialectics
admits antagonisms and splits only to resolve them magically in a higher

12 Hegel, The Science of Logic, p. 843.
13 Hegel, Philosophy of Mind, Pat. 577.
