x PREFACE

progress: nothing is lost in this reduction of lively colourfulness to grey
discipline; in fact, everything is gained - the power of the spirit is precisely
to progress from the ‘green’ immediacy of life to its ‘grey’ conceptual
structure, and to reproduce in this reduced medium the essential deter-
minations to which our immediate experience blinds us.

The same mortification occurs in historical memory and monuments
of the past where what survive are objects deprived of their living souls.
Here is Hegel’s comment apropos Ancient Greece: ‘The statues are now
only stones from which the living soul has flown, just as the hymns are
words from which belief has gone.’ As with the passage from substantial
God to the Holy Spirit, the properly dialectical reanimation is to be sought
in this very medium of ‘grey’ notional determination:

The understanding, through the form of abstract universality, does
give [the varieties of the sensuous], so to speak, a rigidity of being .. .
but, at the same time through this simplification it spiritually animates
them and so sharpens them}

This ‘simplification’ is precisely what Lacan, referring to Freud, deployed
as the reduction of a thing to le trait unaire [der einzige Zug, the unary
feature]: we are dealing with a kind of epitomization by means of which
the multitude of properties is reduced to a single dominant characteristic,
so that we get ‘a concrete shape in which one determination predominates,
the others being present only in blurred outline’: ‘the content is already
the actuality reduced to a possibility [zur Mdglichkeit getilgte Wirklichkeit),
its immediacy overcome, the embodied shape reduced to abbreviated,
simple determinations of thought’.

The dialectical approach is usually perceived as trying to locate the
phenomenon-to-be-analysed in the totality to which it belongs, to bring
to light the wealth of its links to other things, and thus to break the spell

2 G.W.F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spint, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977, p. 455.
3 G.W.F. Hegel, Saence of Logic London and New York: Humanities Press, 1976, p. 611.
4 Hegel, Phenomenology of Spint, p. 17.
