PREFACE xv

True cognition is thus not only the notional ‘appropriation’ of its ob ject:
the process of appropriation goes on only as long as cognition remains
incomplete. The sign of its completion is that it liberates its object, lets
it be, drops it. This is why and how the movement of sublation has to
culminate in the self-relating gesture of sublating itself:

So, what about the obvious counter-argument? Is the part which is
abrogated, released, not precisely the arbitrary, passing aspect of the object,
that which the notional mediation/reduction can afford to drop as being
the part which is in itself worthless? This, precisely, is the illusion to be
avoided, for two reasons. First, it is precisely as discarded that the released
part is, on the contrary, and ifone may be permitted to insist on the excre-
mental metaphor, the manure of spiritual development, the ground out
of which further development will grow. The release of Nature into its
own thus lays the foundation of Spirit proper, which can develop itself
only out of Nature as its inherent self-sublation. Second(and more funda-
mentally), what is released into its own being in speculative cognition is
ultimately the object of cognition itself which, when truly grasped [begrif-
fen], no longer has to rely on the sub ject’s active intervention, but develops
itself following its own conceptual automatism, with the subject reduced
toa passive observer who, allowing the thing to deploy its potential with-
out any intervention of his own (Zutun), merely registers the process. This
is why Hegelian cognition is simultaneously both active and passive, but
ina sense which radically displaces the Kantian notion of cognition as the
unity of activity and passivity. In Kant, the subject actively synthesizes
(confers unity on) the content (sensuous multiplicity) by which he is
passively affected. For Hegel, on the contrary, at the level of Absolute
Knowledge, the cognizing subject is thoroughly passivized: he no longer
intervenes in the object, but merely registers the immanent movement
of the object’s self-differentiation/self-determination (or, to use a more
contemporary term, the object’s autopoietic self-organization). The sub ject
is thus, at its most radical, not the agent of the process: the agent is the
System (of knowledge) itself, which ‘automatically’ deploys itself without
any need for external pushes or impetuses. However, this utter passivity
