xii PREFACE

upon? No wonder Hegel saw himself as Christian: for him, the ritual
earing of bread transubstantiated into Christ’s flesh signals that the
Christiansub ject can integrate and digest God himself without remainder.

Is, consequently, the Hegelian conceiving/grasping not a sublimated
version of digestion? Hegel writes,

If the individual human being does something, achieves something,
attains a goal, this fact must be grounded in the way the thing itself,
in its concept, acts and behaves. If I eat an apple, I destroy its organic
self-identity and assimilate it to myself: That I can do this entails that
the apple in itself, already, in advance, before I take hold of it, has in
its nature the determination of being subject to destruction, having
in itself a homogeneity with my digestive organs such that I can make
it homogeneous with myself>

Is what he offers not a lower version of the cognition process itself in
which, as he likes to point out, we can only grasp the object if this ob ject
itself already ‘wants to be with/by us’? One should push this metaphor
to the end: the standard critical reading constructs the Hegelian absolute
Substance-Subject as thoroughly constipated - retaining within itself the
swallowed content. Or, as Adorno put it in one of his biting remarks
(which, as is all too often the case with him, misses the mark), Hegel’s
system ‘is the belly turned mind’, pretending that it swallowed the entire
indigestible Otherness . . . But what about the counter-movement:
Hegelian shitting? Is the subject of whatHegelcalls ‘absolute Knowledge’
notalso a thoroughly emptted subject, a subject reduced to the role of pure
observer (or, rather, registrar) of the selfmovement of the content itself?

The richest is therefore the most concrete and most subjective, and that
which withdraws itself into the simplest depth is the mightiest and

5 G.W.F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Ill, Betkeley: University of
Cal fornia Press, 1987, p. 127.
6 Theodor W. Adorno, Negative Dialectics, New York: Continuum, 1973, p. 34.
