PREFACE

all the ‘new paradigm’ proposals about the nature of the contemporary
world (that we are entering a post-industrial society, a postmodern
society, a risk society, an informational society .. . ) remain so many
Ptolemizations of the ‘old paradigm’ of classic sociological models.

The question is then: how do things stand with psychoanalysis?
Although Freud presented his discovery as a Copernican revolution, the
fundamental premise of the cognitive sciences is that psychoanalysis
remains a ‘Ptolemization’ of classical psychology, failing to abandon its
most basic premises. (Post-classical economists, incidentally, make the
same claim about Marx: his critique of Smith and Ricardo amounts to a
Ptolemization.) The Sublime Object of Ideology tries to answer this question
by way of rehabilitating psychoanalysis in its philosophical core - as a
theory indebted to Hegel’s dialectics and readable only against this back-
ground. This cannot but appear, perhaps, as the worst possible move to
have made: trying to save psychoanalysis, a discredited theory (and prac-
tice), by reference to an even more discredited theory, the worst kind of
speculative philosophy rendered irrelevant by the progress of modern
science.

However, as Lacan taught us, when we are confronted with an appar-
ently clear choice, sometimes the correct thing to do is choose the worst
option. Thus my wager was (and is) that, through their interaction (reading
Hegel through Lacan and vice versa), psychoanalysis and Hegelian dialectics
may simultaneously redeem themselves, shedding their old skins and
emerging in a new unexpected shape.

Let us take Hegel’s dialectics at its most ‘idealist’ - with the notion of
the sublation [Aufhebung] of all immediate-material reality. The funda-
mental operation of Aufhebung is reduction: the sublated thing survives,
but in an ‘abridged’ edition, as it were, torn out of its life-world context,
stripped down to its essential features, all the movement and wealth of
its life reduced to a fixed mark. It is not that, after the abstraction of Reason
has done its mortifying job with its fixed categories or notional determi-
nations, speculative ‘concrete universality’ somehow returns us to the
fresh greenness of Life; rather, once we pass from empirical reality to its
