xiv

PREFACE

but even pieces of food or dead animals) as being due precisely to the
fact that, in the development of art, subjectivity no longer needs the
visual medium as its principal means of expression - that is, because
the accent has shifted to poetry as a more direct presentation of the
subject’s inner life, the natural environs are ‘released’ from the burden
of expressing subjectivity and, thus freed, can be asserted on their own
terms. Furthermore, as some perspicuous readers of Hegel have already
pointed out, the very sublation of art itselfin the philosophical sciences
(in conceptual thought), the fact that art is no longer obliged to serve
as the principal medium of the expression of the spirit, frees it, allows
it to gain autonomy and stand on its own. Is this not the very definition
of the birth of modern art proper, an art no longer subordinated to the
task of representing spiritual reality?

The way abrogation relates to sublation is not that ofa simple succession
or external opposition, not ‘first you eat, then you shit’. Shitting is the
immanent conclusion of the entire process: withoutit, we would be dealing
with the ‘spurious infinity’ of an endless process of sublation. The process
of sublation itself can only reach its end by way of the counter-move:

contrary to what one would initially imagine, these two processes of
sublation and abrogation are completely interdependent. Considering
the last moment of absolute spirit [Philosophy], one readily notes the
synonymy between the verbs aufhebenand befreien (‘to liberate’), as well
as ablegen|'to discard’, ‘to remove’, ‘to take away’. Speculative abrogation,
in no way alien to the process of Aufhebung, is indeed its fulfilment.
Abrogation is a sublation of sublation, the result of the Aufhebung's work
onitself and, as such, its transformation. The movement of suppression
and preservation produces this transformation at acertain moment in
history, the moment of Absolute Knowledge. Speculative abrogation is
the absolute sublation, if by ‘absolute’ we mean a relief or sublation that
frees from a certain type of attachment.”

1o Catherine Malabou, The Future of Hegel, London: Routledge, 2005, p. 156.
