PREFACE xxi

Back to our main line of argument. What this means is that the exter-
nality of Nature with regard to the Idea is not that of the Idea’s constitutive
exception: it is not that Nature is set free as the exception that guarantees
the Wholeness of the Idea’s self-mediation. It is not the case that, once
this mediation is completed (that is, after the Idea’s dialectical progress
can no longer be propelled by the Idea’s own incompleteness - its failure
to correspond to its own notion), the completed Idea needs an external Other
(Nature) to sustain the completeand closed circle ofits self-mediation. Nature
is, rather, the mark of the non-All of the Idea’s totality.

So, to pursue the rather tasteless metaphor, Hegel was not asublimated
coprophagist, as the usual notion of the dialectical process would lead us
to believe. The matrix of the dialectical process is not that of excrementation-
externalization followed by a swallowing (reappropriation) of the external-
ized content, but, on the contrary, of appropriation followed by the
excremental move of dropping it, releasing it, letting it go. What this
means is that one should not equate externalization with alienation. The
externalization which concludes a cycle of dialectical process is not alien-
ation, it is the highest point of dis-alienation: one really reconciles oneself
with some objective content not when one still has to strive to master
and control it, but when one can afford the supreme sovereign gesture of
releasing this content from oneself, of setting it free. Which is why,
incidentally, and as some of the sharper interpreters have pointed out, far
from subduing nature totally to man, Hegel opens up an unexpected space
for ecological awareness: for Hegel, the drive to exploit nature technolo-
gically is still a mark of man’s finitude; in such an attitude, nature is
perceived as an external object, an opposing force to be dominated, while
a philosopher, from his standpoint of Absolute Knowledge, experiences
nature not as a threatening force to be controlled and dominated, but as
something to be left to follow its inherent path.

What this means is that the Hegelian Sub ject-Substance has nothing
to do with any kind of mega-Sub ject controlling the dialectical process:
there isnoonepulling the strings or controlling the process - the Hegelian
System is a plane without a pilot. Here, Louis Althusser went wrong when
