xviii PREFACE

synthesis-mediation - strangely contrasts with the good old Marxist
reproach (already formulated by Schelling) according to which Hegel
resolves antagonisms only in ‘thought’, through conceptual mediation,
while in reality they remain unresolved. One is tempted to accept this
second reproach at face value and use it against the first one: what if this
is the proper answer to the accusation that Hegelian dialectics magically
resolves antagonisms? What if, for Hegel, the point, precisely, is to not
‘resolve’ antagonisms ‘in reality’, but simply to enact a parallax shift by
means of which antagonisms are recognized “as such’ and thereby perceived
in their ‘positive’ role?

The passage from Kant to Hegel is thus much more convoluted than it
may appear ~ let us approach it again by way of their different attitudes to
the ontological proof of God’s existence. Kant’s rejection of this proof takes
as its starting point his thesis that being is not a predicate: if one knows all
the predicates of an entity, its being (existence) does not follow, that is, one
cannot conclude a being from a notion. (The anti-Leibniz line is obvious
here, since, according to Leibniz, two objects are indistinguishable if all of
their predicates are the same.) The implication for the ontological proof of
God is clear: in the same way that I can havea perfect notion of 100 thalers
and yet still not have them in my pocket, I can have a perfect notion of
God and yet God still may not exist. Hegel’s first remark on this line of
reasoning is that ‘being’ is the poorest, most imperfect, notional deter-
mination (everything ‘is’ in some way, even my craziest phantasmagorias);
it is only through further notional determinations that we get to existence,
to reality, to actuality, which are all much more than mere being. His
second remark is that the gap between notion and existence is precisely
the mark of finitude; it holds for finite objects like 100 thalers, but not
for God: God is not something I can have (or not have) in my pocket .. .

On a first approach, it may seem that the opposition between Kant and
Hegel is here ultimately that between materialism and idealism: Kant insists
on a minimum of materialism (the independence of reality with regard to
notional determinations), while Hegel totally dissolves reality in its notional
determinations. However, Hegel’s true point lies elsewhere: it involves a
