xvi PREFACE

simultaneously involves the greatest activity: it takes the most strenuous
effort for the subject to ‘erase itself in its particular content, as the agent
intervening in the object, and to expose itself as a neutral medium, the
site of the System’s self-deployment. Hegel thereby overcomes the standard
dualism between System and Freedom, between the Spinozist notion of a
substantial deus sive natura of which I am a part, caught up in its deter-
minism, and the Fichtean notion of the subject as the agent opposed to
inert matter, trying to dominate and appropriate it: che supreme moment of
the subject’s freedom is to set free its object, to leave it free to deploy itself: ‘The
Idea’s absolute freedom consists in [the fact] that it resolves to freely let
go out of itself the moment of its particularity."

‘Absolute freedom’ is here literally absolute in the etymological sense
of absolvere: releasing, letting go. Schelling was the first to criticize this
move as illegitimate: after Hegel completed the circle of the logical self-
development of the Notion, and being aware that the whole of this
development took place in the abstract medium of thought, he had some-
how to make the passage back to real life - however, since there were no
categories in his logic to accomplish this passage, he had to resort to
terms like ‘decision’ (the Idea ‘decides’ to release Nature from itself), terms
which are not categories of logic, but of the will and practical life. This
critique clearly misses the way the act of releasing the other is thoroughly
immanent to the dialectical process, is its conclusive moment, the sign of
the conclusion of a dialectical circle. Is this not the Hegelian version of
Gelassenheit?

This is how one should read Hegel’s ‘third syllogism of Philosophy’,
Spirit-Logic-Nature: the starting point of the speculative movement
rendered by this syllogism is spiritual substance into which subjects are
immersed; then, through strenuous conceptual work, the wealth of this
substance is reduced to its underlying elementary logical/notional
structure; once this task is accomplished, the fully developed logical Idea
can release Nature out of itself. Here is the key passage:

11 G.W.F. Hegel, Encyclopaedia ofthe Philosophical Sciences, Part I: Logic, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1892, Par. 244.
