xx PREFACE

With regard to material reality, the ontological proof of God’s existence
should thus be turned around: the existence of material reality bears
witness to the fact that the Notion is not fully actualized. Things

“materially exist’ not when they meet certain notional requirements, but
when they fail to meet them - material reality is as such a sign of
imperfection. With regard to truth, this means that, for Hegel, the truth
of a proposition is inherently notional, determined by the immanent
notional content, not a matter of comparison between notion and reality
- in Lacanian terms, there is a non-All [pas-cout| of truth. It may sound
strange to invoke Hegel apropos the non-All: is Hegel not the philosopher
of All par excellence? However, Hegelian truth is precisely without any
external limitation/exception that would serve as its measure or standard,
which is why its criterion is absolutely immanent: one compares a state-
ment with itself, with its own process of enunciation.

When Alain Badiou emphasizes the undecidability of a Truth-Event,
his position is radically different from the standard deconstructionist
notion of undecidability.'* For Badiou, undecidability means that there
are no neutral ‘objective’ criteria for an Event: an Event appears as such
only to those who recognize themselves in its call; or, as Badiou puts it,
an Event is self-relating, it includes itself - its own nomination - among
its components. While this does mean that one has to decide about an
Event, such an ultimately groundless decision is not ‘undecidable’ in the
standard sense; it is, rather, uncannily similar to the Hegelian dialectical
process in which, as Hegel himself made clear already in the Introduction
to his Phenomenology, a ‘figure of consciousness’ is not measured by any
external standard of truth but in an absolutely immanent way, through
the gap between itself and its own exemplification/staging. An Event is
thus ‘non-All’ in the precise Lacanian sense of the term: it is never fully
verified precisely because it is infinite/unlimited, that is, because there is
no external limit to it. And the conclusion to be drawn here is that, for
the very same reason, the Hegelian ‘totality’ is also ‘non-All’.

14 SeeAlain Badiou, Létre et /&vénement, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1989.
