PREFACE xiii

most all-embracing. The highest, most concentrated point is the pure
personality which, solely through the absolute dialectic which is its
nature, no less embraces and holds everything within ttself?

In this strict sense, the subject itself is the abrogated/cleansed substance,
a substance reduced to the void of the empty form of self-relating
negativity, emptied of all the wealth of ‘personality’ - in Lacanese, the
move from substance to subject is the one from S to $, that is, the subject
is the barred substance. (Adorno and Horkheimer, in Dialectic of Enlight-
enment, make the critical point that the Self bent on mere survival has to
sacrifice all content that would make such a survival worthwhile; Hegel,
on the contrary, views such a constitutive sacrifice positively.) Schelling
referred to this same move as contraction (again, with the excremental
connotation of squeezing the shit out of oneself, dropping it out): the
subject is the contracted substance.

Does then the final subjective position of the Hegelian system not
compel us to turn the digestive metaphor around? The supreme (and, for
many, the most problematic) case of this counter-movement occurs at the
very end of the Lagic, when, after the notional deployment is completed,
reaching the full circle of the absolute Idea, the Idea, in its resolve/decision,
‘freely releases itself into Nature, lets Nature go, leaves it off, discards it,
pushes it away from itself, and thus liberates it’ Which is why, for Hegel,
the philosophy of nature is not a violent reappropriation of this exter-
nality; it rather involves the passive attitude of an observer: as he puts it
in the Philosophy of Mind, ‘philosophy has, as it were, simply to watch how
nature itself sublates its externality’?

The same move is accomplished by God himself who, in the guise of
Christ, this finite mortal, also ‘freely releases himself into temporal
existence. The same goes for early modern art, where Hegel accounts for
the rise of ‘dead nature’ paintings (not only landscapes and flowers, etc.,

7 Hegel, Science of Lagic, p. 841.
8 Ibid., p. 843.
9 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Mind, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971, Para. 381, p. 14.
