--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
THE SUBLIME OBJECT 
OF IDEOLOGY 
 
SLAVOJ ZrZEK 
VERSO 
London • New York 

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Contents 
PrifO.ce to the New Edition: 
The Idea's Constipation 
Introduction 
Part I The Symptom 
1 
How Did Marx Invent the Symptom? 
2 
From Symptom to Sinthome 
Part II Lack in the Other 
3 
'Che Vuoi?' 
4 
You Only Die Twice 
Part III ,The Subject 
5 
which Subject of the Real? 
6 
'Not Only as substance, but Also as Subject! 
Index 
IX 
XXlll 
1 
57 
95 
145 
171 
227 

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
Preface to the New Edition: 
The Idea's Constipation? 
When a discipline is in crisis, attempts are made to change or supplement 
its theses within the terms of its basic framework - a procedure one might 
call 'Ptolemization' (since when data poured in which clashed with 
Ptolemy's earth-centred astronomy, his partisans introduced additional 
complications to account for the anomalies). But the true 'Copernican' 
revolution takes place when, instead of just adding complications and 
changing minor premises, the basic framework itself undergoes a trans­
formation. So, when we are dealing with a self-professed 'scientific 
revolution', the question to ask is always: is this truly a Copernican 
revolution, or merely a Ptolemization of the old paradigm? 
Two examples ofPtolemization: there are good reasons to claim that 
'string theory', which claims to provide the foundations for a unified 
theory (a single theoretical framework describing the four fundamental 
interactions between subatomic particles that were previously explained 
separately by relativity theory or quantum physics), remains an attempt 
at Ptolemization, and that we are still waiting for a new beginning which 
will require an even more radical change in the basic presuppositions 
(something like abandoning time or space as the basic constituent of 
reality).' Likewise, in social theory, there are good reasons to claim that 
1 
See Lee Smolin, 'The 'Trouble with pI!JISlCs New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 
2006. 

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
PREFACE 
all the 'new paradigm' proposals about the nature of the contemporary 
world (that we are entering a post-industrial society, a postmodern 
society, a risk society, an informational society . . . ) remain so many 
Ptolemizations of the 'old paradigm' of classic sociological models. 
The question is then: how do things stand with psychoanalysis? 
Although Freud presented his discovery as a Copernican revolution, the 
fundamental premise of the cognitive sciences is that psychoanalysis 
remains a 'Ptolemization' of classical psychology, failing to abandon its 
most basic premises. (Post-classical economists, incidentally, make the 
same claim about Marx: his critique of Smith and Ricardo amounts to a 
Ptolemization.) The Sublime Object o/"Ideology tries to answer this question 
by way of rehabilitating psychoanalysis in its philosophical core - as a 
theory indebted to Hegel's dialectics and readable only against this back­
ground. This cannot but appear, perhaps, as the worst possible move to 
have made: trying to save psychoanalysis, a discredited theory (and prac­
tice), by reference to an even more discredited theory, the worst kind of 
speculative philosophy rendered irrelevant by the progress of modern 
SClence. 
However, as Lacan taught us, when we are confronted with an appar­
ently clear choice, sometimes the correct thing to do is choose the worst 
option. Thus my wager was (and is) that, through their interaction (reading 
Hegel through Lacan and vice versa), psychoanalysis and Hegelian dialectics 
may simultaneously redeem themselves, shedding their old skins and 
emerging in a new unexpected shape. 
Let us take Hegel's dialectics at its most 'idealist' - with the notion of 
the sublation [AtifhebuI{9"l of all immediate-material reality. The funda­
mental operation of Atifhebu118 is reduction: the sublated thing survives, 
but in an 'abridged' edition, as it were, torn out of its life-world context, 
stripped down to its essential features, all the movement and wealth of 
its life reduced to a fIxed mark. It is not that, after the abstraction of Reason 
has done its mortifyingjob with its fIXed categories or notional determi­
nations, speculative 'concrete universality' somehow returns us to the 
fresh greenness ofLife; rather, once we pass from empirical reality to its 

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
PREFACE 
ix 
notional Azifhebung, the immediacy of Life is lost forever. There is nothing 
more foreign to Hegel than a lamentation for the richness of reality that 
gets lost when we proceed to its conceptual grasp. Recall Hegel's unam­
biguous celebration of the absolute power of Understanding from his Fore­
word to the Phenomenology: 'The action of separating the elements is the 
exercise of the force of Understanding, the most astonishing and greatest 
of all powers, or rather the absolute power.' This celebration is in no way 
qualified; that is, Hegel's point is trot that this power is nonetheless later 
'sublated' into a subordinate moment of the unifYing totality of Reason. 
The problem with Understanding is, rather, that it does not unleash this 
power to the end, that it takes it as external to the thing itself-hence the 
standard notion that it is merely ourUnderstanding ('mind') that separates 
in its imagination what in 'reality' belongs together, so that the Under­
standing's 'absolute power' is merely the power of our imagination, which 
in no way concerns the reality of the thing so analysed. We pass from 
Understanding to Reason not when this analysis, or tearing apart, is over­
come in a synthesis that brings us back to the wealth of reality, but when 
this power of'tearing apart' is displaced from being 'merely in our mind' 
into things themselves, as their inherent power of negativity. 
Back in the 1960s, one 'progressive' theorist of education touched a 
chord when he published the results of a simple experiment: he asked a 
group offive-year-olds to draw an image of themselves playing at home; 
then, he asked the same group to do it again two years later, after they 
had been through a year and a half of primary school. The difference was 
striking: the self-portraits of the five-year-olds were exuberant, lively, full 
of colours, surrealistically playful; two years later, the portraits were much 
more rigid and subdued, with a large majority of the children sponta­
'neously choosing only the grey of the ordinary pencil, although other 
colours were at their disposal. O!:tite predictably, this experiment was 
taken as proof of the 'oppressiveness' of the school apparatus, of how the 
drill and discipline of school squash children's spontaneous creativity, and 
so on and so forth. From a Hegelian standpoint, however, one should, on 
the contrary, celebrate this shift as an indication of crucial spiritual 

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
x 
PREFACE 
progress: nothing is lost in this reduction oflivelj colourfulness to grey 
discipline; in fact, everything is gained - the power of the spirit is precisely 
to progress from the 'green' immediacy of life to its 'grey' conceptual 
structure, and to reproduce in this reduced medium the essential deter­
minations to which our immediate experience blinds us. 
The same mortification occurs in historical memory and monuments 
of the past where what survive are objects deprived of their living souls. 
Here is Hegel's comment apropos Ancient Greece: 'The statues are now 
only stones from which the living soul has flown, just as the hymns are 
words from which belief has gone." As with the passage from substantial 
God to the Holy Spirit, the properly dialectical reanimation is to be sought 
in this very medium of , grey' notional determination: 
The understanding, through the form of abstract universality, does 
give [the varieties of the sensuous], so to speak, a rigidity of being . . .  
but, at the same time through this simplification it spin'tualfy animates 
them and so sharpens them.) 
This 'simplification' is precisely what Lacan, referring to Freud, deployed 
as the reduction of a thing to Ie trait unaire [der einzige Zll8, the unary 
feature]: we are dealing with a kind of epitomization by means of which 
the multitude of properties is reduced to a single dominant characteristic, 
so that we get 'a concrete shape in which one determination predominates, 
the others being present only in blurred outline': 'the content is already 
the actuality reduced to a possibility [zur M6glichkeitgeti(gte Wirklichkeiz, 
its immediacy overcome, the embodied shape reduced to abbreviated, 
simple determinations of thought'.4 
The dialectical approach is usually perceived as trying to locate the 
phenomenon-to-be-analysed in the totality to which it belongs, to bring 
to light the wealth of its links to other things, and thus to break the spell 
z 
G. W, F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977, p. 455· 
G. W. F. Hegel, Science ofLogi" london and New York: Humanities Press, 1976, p. 611. 
4 
Hegel, PhellomellologyofSpin't, p. 17· 

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
PREFACE 
xi 
of fetishizing abstraction: from a dialectical perspective, one should see 
not just the thing in front of oneself, but this thing as it is embedded in 
all the wealth of its concrete historical context. This, however, is the most 
dangerous trap to be avoided; for Hegel, the true problem is precisely the 
opposite one: the fact that, when we observe a thing, we see too much in 
it, we fall under the spell of the wealth of empirical detail which prevents 
us from clearly perceiving the notional determination which forms the 
core of the thing. The problem is thus not that of how to grasp the 
multiplicity of determinations, but rather of how to abstract from them, 
how to constrain our gaze and teach it to grasp only the notional 
determination. 
Hegel's formulation is here very precise: the reduction to the signifjring 
'unary feature' contracts actuality to possibility, in the precise Platonic 
sense in which the notion (idea) of a thing always has a deontological 
dimension to it, designating what the thi,¥! should become in order to be fulfy 
what it is. 'Potentiality' is thus not simply the name for the essence of a 
thing actualized in the multitude of empirical things (the idea of a chair 
as a potentiality actualized in empirical chairs). The multitude of a thing's 
actual properties is not simply reduced to the inner core of this thing's 
'true reality'; what is more important is that the signifYing reduction 
accentuates (profiles) the thing's inner potentiaL When I call someone 'my 
teacher', I thereby outline the horizon of what I expect from him; when 
I refer to a thing as 'chair', I profile the way I intend to use it in future. 
When I observe the world around me through the lenses of a language, I 
perceive its actuality through the lenses of the potentialities hidden, 
latently present, in it. What this means is that potentiality appears 'as 
such', becomes actual as potentiality, only through language: it is the 
appellation of a thing that brings to light ('posits') its potentials. 
Once we grasp Arifhebung in this way, we can immediately see what is 
wrong with one of the main topics of the pseudo-Freudian dismissal of 
Hegel: the notion of Hegel's System as being the highest and most 
overblown expression of an oral economy. Is not the Hegelian Idea effec­
tively a voracious devourer which 'swallows up' every object it comes 

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
)(ii 
PREFACE 
upon? No wonder Hegel saw himself as Christian: for him, the ritual 
eating of bread transubstantiated into Christ's flesh signals that the 
Christian subject can integrate and digest God himself without remainder. 
Is, consequently, the Hegelian conceiving/grasping not a sublimated 
version of digestion? Hegel writes, 
If the individual human being does something, achieves something, 
attains a goal, this fact must be grounded in the way the thing itself, 
in its concept, acts and behaves. If! eat an apple, I destroy its organic 
self-identity and assimilate it to myself That I can do this entails that 
the apple in itself, already, in advance, before I take hold of it, has in 
its nature the determination of being subject to destruction, having 
in itself a homogeneity with my digestive organs such that I can make 
it homogeneous with mysel£5 
Is what he offers not a lower version of the cognition process itself in 
which, as he likes to point out, we can only grasp the object if this object 
itself already 'wants to be with/by us'? One should push this metaphor 
to the end: the standard critical reading constructs the Hegelian absolute 
Substance-Subject as thoroughly constipated - retaining within itself the 
swallowed content. Or, as Adorno put it in one of his biting remarks 
(which, as is all too often the case with him, misses the mark), Hegel's 
system 'is the belly turned mind',6 pretending that it swallowed the entire 
indigestible Otherness . . .  But what about the counter-movement: 
Hegelian shitting? Is the subject of what Hegel calls 'absolute Knowledge' 
not also a thoroughly emptied subject, a subject reduced to the role of pure 
observer (or, rather, registrar) of the self-movement of the content itself? 
The richest is therefore the most concrete and most sul?jectille, and that 
which withdraws itself into the simplest depth is the mightiest and 
5 
G. W. F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosopl!)' ofRelitJion Ill, Berkeley: University of 
Calfornia Press, 1987, p. 127. 
6 Theodor W. Adorno, Negative Dialectics, New York: Continuum, 1973, p. 34. 

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
PREFACE 
xiii 
most all-embracing. The highest, most concentrated point is the pure 
personality which, solely through the absolute dialectic which is its 
nature, no less embraces and holds evel)'thi1l8 within itse!f/ 
In this strict sense, the subject itself is the abrogated/cleansed substance, 
a substance reduced to the void of the empty form of self-relating 
negativity, emptied of all the wealth of 'personality' - in Lacanese, the 
move from substance to subject is the one from S to ɼ, that is, the subject 
is the barred substance. (Adorno and Horkheimer, in Dialectic ofEnlight­
enment, make the critical point that the Self bent on mere survival has to 
sacrifice all content that would make such a survival worthwhile; Hegel, 
on the contrary, views such a constitutive sacrifice positively.) Schelling 
referred to this same move as contraction (again, with the excremental 
connotation of squeezing the shit out of oneself, dropping it out): the 
subject is the contracted substance. 
Does then the final subjective position of the Hegelian system not 
compel us to turn the digestive metaphor around? The supreme (and, for 
many, the most problematic) case of this counter-movement occurs at the 
very end of the Logic, when, after the notional deployment is completed, 
reaching the full circle of the absolute Idea, the Idea, in its resolve/decision, 
'freely releases itself into Nature, lets Nature go, leaves it off, discards it, 
pushes it away from itself, and thus liberates it.8 Which is why, for Hegel, 
the philosophy of nature is not a violent reappropriation of this exter­
nality; it rather involves the passive attitude of an observer: as he puts it 
in the philosop/yl of Mind, 'philosophy has, as it were, simply to watch how 
nature itself sublates its externality'.9 
The same move is accomplished by God himself who, in the guise of 
Christ, this finite mortal, also 'freely releases himself into temporal 
existence. The same goes for early modern art, where Hegel accounts for 
the rise of ' dead nature' paintings (not only landscapes and flowers, etc., 
7 
Hegel, Science ojLogic, p. 841. 
8 
Ibid., p. 843. 
9 
G. W. F. Hegel, philosop» ofMlild, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971, Para. 381, p. 14. 

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
xiv 
PREFACE 
but even pieces of food or dead animals) as being due precisely to the 
fact that, in the development of art, subjectivity no longer needs the 
visual medium as its principal means of expression - that is, because 
the accent has shifted to poetry as a more direct presentation of the 
subject's inner life, the natural environs are 'released' from the burden 
of expressing subjectivity and, thus freed, can be asserted on their own 
terms. Furthermore, as some perspicuous readers of Hegel have already 
pointed out, the very sublation of art itselfin the philosophical sciences 
(in conceptual thought), the fact that art is no longer obliged to serve 
as the principal medium of the expression of the spirit, frees it, allows 
it to gain autonomy and stand on its own. Is this not the very definition 
of the birth of modern art proper, an art no longer subordinated to the 
task of representing spiritual reality? 
The way abrogation relates to sublation is not that of a si࠰ple succession 
or external opposition, not 'first you eat, then you shit'. Shitting is the 
immanent cOIle/usioll of the entire process: without it, we would be dealing 
with the 'spurious infinity' of an endless process of sublation. The process 
of sublation itself can only reach its end by way of the counter-move: 
contrary to what one would initially imagine, these two processes of 
sublation and abrogation are completely interdependent. Considering 
the last moment of absolute spirit [philosoplfy], one readily notes the 
synonymy between the verbs atifheben and befteien ['to liberate'], as well 
as ablegen ['to discard', 'to remove', 'to take away} Speculative abrogation, 
in no way alien to the process of Azifhebung, is indeed its fulfilment. 
Abrogation is a sublation ofsublation, the result of the Azifhebung s work 
on itself and, as such, its transformation. The movement of suppression 
and preservation produces this transformation at a certain moment in 
history, the moment of Absolute Knowledge. Speculative abrogation is 
the absolute sublatioll, ifby 'absolute' we mean a relief or sublation that 
frees from a certain type of attachment. '0 
10 Catherine Malabou, The Future ifHI!el, London: Routledge, 2005. p. 156. 

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
PREFACE 
xv 
True cognition is thus not only the notional 'appropriation' of its object: 
the process of appropriation goes on only as long as cognition remains 
incomplete. The sign of its completion is that it liberates its object, lets 
it be, drops it. This is why and how the movement of sublation has to 
culminate in the self-relating gesture of sublating itselE 
So, what about the obvious counter-argument? Is the part which is 
abrogated, released, not precisely the arbitrary, passing aspect of the object, 
that which the notional mediation/reduction can afford to drop as being 
the part which is in itself worthless? This, precisely, is the illusion to be 
avoided, for two reasons. First, it is precisely as discarded that the released 
part is, on the contrary, and if one may be permitted to insist on the excre­
mental metaphor, the manure of spiritual development, the ground out 
of which further development will grow. The release of Nature into its 
own thus lays the foundation of Spirit proper, which can develop itself 
only out of Nature as its inherent self-sublation. Second (and more fimda­
mentally), what is released into its own being in speculative cognition is 
ultimately the object of cognition itself which, when truly grasped [begrif­
fin], no longer has to rely on the subject's active intervention, but develops 
itself following its own conceptual automatism, with the subject reduced 
to a passive observer who, allowing the thing to deploy its potential with­
out any intervention of his own (Ziltun), merely registers the process. This 
is why Hegelian cognition is simultaneously both active and passive, but 
in a sense which radically displaces the Kantian notion of cognition as the 
unity of activity and passivity. In Kant, the subject actively synthesizes 
(confers unity on) the content (sensuous multiplicity) by which he is 
passively affected. For Hegel, on the contrary, at the level of Absolute 
Knowledge, the cognizing subject is thoroughly passivized: he no longer 
intervenes in the object, but merely registers the immanent movement 
of the object's self-differentiation/self-determination (or, to use a more 
contemporary term, the object's autopoietic self-organization). The subject 
is thus, at its most radical, not the agent of the process: the agent is the 
System (of knowledge) itself, which 'automatically' deploys itself without 
any need for external pushes or impetuses. However, this utter passivity 

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
xvi 
PREFACE 
simultaneously involves the greatest activity: it takes the most strenuous 
effort for the subject to 'erase itself in its particular content, as the agent 
intervening in the object, and to expose itself as a neutral medium, the 
site of the System's self-deployment. Hegel thereby overcomes the standard 
dualism between System and Freedom, between the Spinozist notion of a 
substantial deus sive natura of which I am a part, caught up in its deter­
minism, and the Fichtean notion of the subject as the agent opposed to 
inert matter, trying to dominate and appropriate it: the supreme moment of 
the suiject's fieedom is to setfiee its ofjea, to leave it free to deploy itself: 'The 
Idea's absolute freedom consists in [the fact] that it resolves to freely let 
go out of itself the moment of its particularity.'n 
'Absolute freedom' is here literally absolute in the etymological sense 
of absolvere: releasing, letting go. Schelling was the first to criticize this 
move as illegitimate: after Hegel completed the circle of the logical self­
development of the Notion, and being aware that the whole of this 
development took place in the abstract medium of thought, he had some­
how to make the passage back to real life - however, since there were no 
categories in his logic to accomplish this passage, he had to resort to 
terms like ' decision' (the Idea' decides' to release Nature from itselfj, terms 
which are not categories of logic, but of the will and practical life. This 
critique clearly misses the way the act of releasing the other is thoroughly 
immanent to the dialectical process, is its conclusive moment, the sign of 
the conclusion of a dialectical circle. Is this not the Hegelian version of 
Gelassenheit? 
This is how one should read Hegel's 'third syllogism of Philosophy', 
Spirit-Logic-Nature: the starting point of the speculative movement 
rendered by this syllogism is spiritual substance into which subjects are 
immersed; then, through strenuous conceptual work, the wealth of this 
substance is reduced to its underlying elementary logical/notional 
structure; once this task is accomplished, the fully developed logical Idea 
can release Nature out ofitsel£ Here is the key passage: 
11 
G. W. F. Hegel, Eng'dopaedia of the philosophical Sciellces, Part I: Logic, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1892, Par. 24. 

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
PREFACE 
xvii 
The Idea, namely, in positing itself as absolute unity of the pure Notion 
and its reality and thus contracting itself into the immediacy of being, 
is the totality in this form - nature.l2 
But this determination has not issued from a process of becoming, nor 
is it a transition, as when above, the subjective Notion in its totality 
becomes objectivity, and the subjective end becomes life. On the contrary, 
the pure Idea in which the determinateness or reality of the Notion is 
itself raised into Notion, is an absolute liberation for which there is no 
longer any immediate determination that is not equally posited and itself 
Notion; in this freedom, therefore, no transition takes place; the simple 
being to which the Idea determines itself remains perfectly transparent 
to it and is the Notion that, in its determination, abides with itself The 
passage is therefore to be understood here rather in this manner, that 
the Idea freely releases itselfin its absolute self-assurance and inner poise. 
By reason of this freedom, the form of its determinateness is also utterly 
free - the externality of space and time existing absolutely on its own 
account without the moment of subjectivity.l] Hegel repeatedly insist's 
here on this 'absolute liberation' being thoroughly different from the 
standard dialectical 'transition'. But how? The suspicion lurks that Hegel's 
'absolute liberation' relies on the absolute mediation of all otherness: I 
set the Other free only after I have completely internalized it . . .  However, 
is this really the case? 
One should here reread Lacan's critique of Hegel: what if, far from 
denying what Lacan calls the 'subjective disjunction', Hegel on the contrary 
asserts a previously unheard-of division that runs through the (particular) 
sul?ject as well as through the (universalj substantial order of'coliectivi!J: uniting 
the two? That is to say, what if the 'reconciliation' berween the Particular 
and the Universal occurs precisely through the division that cuts across 
the two? The basic 'postmodern' reproach to Hegel - that his dialectics 
admits antagonisms and splits only to resolve them magically in a higher 
lZ 
Hegel, The Science ojLogic, p. 843· 
13 
Hegel, philosop1!J of Mind, Par. 57. 

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
xviii 
PREFACE 
synthesis-mediation - strangely contrasts with the good old Marxist 
reproach (already formulated by Schelling) according to which Hegel 
resolves antagonisms only in 'thought', through conceptual mediation, 
while in reality they remain unresolved. One is tempted to accept this 
second reproach at face value and use it against the first one: what if this 
is the proper answer to the accusation that Hegelian dialectics magically 
resolves antagonisms? What if, for Hegel, the poinr, precisely, is to not 
'resolve' antagonisms 'in reality', but simply to enact a parallax shift by 
means of which antagonisms are recognized' as such' and thereby perceived 
in their 'positive' role? 
The passage from Kant to Hegel is thus much more convoluted than it 
may appear :.let us approach it again by way of their different attitudes to 
the ontological proof of God's existence. Kant's rejection of this proof takes 
as its starting point his thesis that being is not a predicate: if one knows all 
the predicates of an entity, its being (existence) does not follow, that is, one 
cannot conclude a being from a notion. (The anti-Leibniz line is obvious 
here, since, according to Leibniz, two objects are indistinguishable if all of 
their predicates are the same.) The implication for the ontological proof of 
God is clear: in the same way that I can have a perfect notion of 100 thalers 
and yet still not have them in my pocket, I can have a perfect notion of 
God and yet God still may not exist. Hegel's first remark on this line of 
reasoning is that 'being' is the poorest, most imperfect, notional deter­
mination (everything 'is' in some way, even my craziest phantasmagorias); 
it is only through further notional determinations that we get to existence, 
to reality, to actuality, which are all much more than mere being. His 
second remark is that the gap between notion and existence is precisely 
the mark of finitude; it holds for finite objects like 100 thalers, but not 
for God: God is not something I can have (or not have) in my pocket . . .  
On a first approach, it may seem that the opposition between Kant and 
Hegel is here ultimately that between materialism and idealism: Kant insists 
on a minimum of materialism (the independence of reality with regard to 
notional determinations), while Hegel totally dissolves reality in its notional 
determinations. However, Hegel's true point lies elsewhere: it involves a 

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
PREFACE 
xix 
much more radical 'materialist' claim that a complete notional 
determination of an entity - to which one would only have to add 'being' 
in order to arrive at its existence - is in itself an abstract notion, an empty 
abstract possibility. The lack of (a certain mode ofj being is always also an 
inherent lack of some notional determination - say, for a thing to exist as 
part of opaque material reality, a whole set of notional conditions­
determinations have to be met( and other determinations have to be lacking). 
With regard to 100 thalers (or any other empirical object), this means that 
their notional determination is abstract, which is why they possess an opaque 
empirical being and not full actuality. So when Kant draws a parallel between 
God and the 100 thalers, one should ask a simple and naive question: does 
Kant realfy possess a (fully developed) concept of God? 
This brings us to the true finesse of Hegel's argumentation, which is 
directed in two ways, both against Kant and against Anselm's classic version 
of the ontological proof of God. Hegel's argument against Anselin's proof 
is not that it is too conceptual, but that it is not conceptual enough: Anselm 
does not develop the concept of God, he just refers to it as the sum of all 
perfections which, as such, is precisely beyond the comprehension of our 
finite human minds. Anselm merely presupposes 'God' as an impenetrable 
reality beyond our comprehension (i.e., outside the notional domain), in 
other words, his God is precisely not a concept (something posited by our 
conceptual work), but a purely presupposed pre-or non-conceptual reality. 
Along the same lines, albeit in the opposite sense, one should note the 
irony in the fact that Kant talks about thalers, that is, about money, whose 
existence as money is not 'objective', but depends on 'notional' 
determinations. It is true, as Kant says, that having a concept of 100 thalers 
is not the same as having them in your pocket; but ࠯et us imagine a process 
of rapid inflation which totally devalues the 100 thalers in your pocket; 
in this case, the same object is there in reality, but it is no longer money, 
having become a meaningless and worthless coin. In other words, money 
is precisely an object whose status depends on how we 'think' about it: if 
people no longer treat this piece of metal as money, if they no longer 
'believe' in it as money, it no longer is money. 

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
xx 
PREFACE 
With regard to material reality, the ontological proof of God's existence 
should thus be turned around: the existence of material reality bears 
witness to the fact that the Notion is not fully actualized. Things 
. 'materially exist' not when they meet certain notional requirements, but 
when they foil to meet them - material reality is as such a sign of 
imperfection. With regard to truth, this means that, for Hegel, the truth 
of a proposition is inherently notional, determined by the immanent 
notional content, not a matter of comparison between notion and reality 
- in Lacanian terms, there is a non-All (p£l.f-tou of truth. It may sound 
strange to invoke Hegel apropos the non-All: is Hegel not the philosopher 
of All par excellence? However, Hegelian truth is precisely without any 
external limitation/exception that would serve as its measure or standard, 
which is why its criterion is absolutely immanent: one compares a state­
ment with itself, with its own process of enunciation. 
When Alain Badiou emphasizes the undecidability of a Truth-Event, 
his position is radically different from the standard deconstructionist 
notion of undecidability.'4 For Badiou, undecidability means that there 
are no neutral 'objective' criteria for an Event: an Event appears as such 
only to those who recognize themselves in its call; or, as Badiou puts it, 
an Event is self-relating, it includes itself- its own nomination - among 
its components. While this does mean that one has to decide about an 
Event, such an ultimately groundless decision is not 'undecidable' in the 
standard sense; it is, rather, uncannily similar to the Hegelian dialectical 
process in which, as Hegel himself made clear already in the Introduction 
to his Phenomenology, a 'figure of consciousness' is not measured by any 
external standard of truth but in an absolutely immanent way, through 
the gap between itself and its own exemplification/staging. An Event is 
thus 'non-All' in the precise Lacanian sense of the term: it is never fully 
verified precisely because it is infinite/unlimited, that is, because there is 
no external limit to it. And the conclusion to be drawn here is that, for 
the very same reason, the Hegelian 'totality' is also 'non-All'. 
14 See Alain Badiou, L '!tre et /'fvenement, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1989. 

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
PREFACE 
xxi 
Back to our main line of argument. What this means is that the exter­
nality of Nature with regard to the Idea is not that of the Idea's constitutive  
exception: it is not that Nature is set free as the exception that guarantees 
the Wholeness of the Idea's self-mediation. It is not the case that, once 
this mediation is completed (that is, after the Idea's dialectical progress 
can no longer be propelled by the Idea's own incompleteness - its failure 
to correspond to its own notion), the completed Idea needs an external Other 
(Nature) to sustain the complete and closed circle of its self-mediation. Nature 
is, rather, the mark of the non-All of the Idea's totality. 
So, to pursue the rather tasteless metaphor, Hegel was not a sublimated 
coprophagist, as the usual notion of the dialectical process would lead us 
to believe. The matrix of the dialectical process is not that of excrementation­
externalization followed by a swallowing (reappropriation) of the external­
ized content, but, on the contrary, of appropriation followed by the 
excremental move of dropping it, releasing it, letting it go. What this 
means is that one should not equate externalization with alienation. The 
externalization which concludes a cycle of dialectical process is not alien­
ation, it is the highest point of dis-alienation: one really reconciles oneself 
with some objective content not when one still has to strive to master 
and control it, but when one can afford the supreme sovereign gesture of 
releasing this content from oneself, of setting it free. Which is why, 
incidentally, and as some of the sharper interpreters have pointed out, far 
from subduing nature totally to man, Hegel opens up an unexpected space 
for ecological awareness: for Hegel, the drive to exploit nature technolo­
gically is still a mark of man's finitude; in such an attitude, nature is 
perceived as an external object, an opposing force to be dominated, while 
a philosopher, from his standpoint of Absolute Knowledge, experiences 
nature not as a threatening force to be controlled and dominated, but as 
something to be left to follow its inherent path. 
What this means is that the Hegelian Subject-Substance has nothing 
to do with any kind of mega-Subject controlling the dialectical process: 
there is no one pulling the strings or controlling the process - the Hegelian 
System is a plane without a pilot. Here, Louis Althusser went wrong when 

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
xxii 
PREFACE 
he opposed the Hegelian Subject-Substance, the 'teleological' process­
with-a-subject, to the materialist-dialectical 'process without a subject'. 
The Hegelian dialectical process is in fact the most radical version of a 
'process without a subject', in the sense of an agent controlling and 
directing the process, be it God or humanity or class as a collective subject. 
In his later writings, Althusser was becoming aware of this, while remain­
ing thoroughly unaware of how the fact that the Hegelian dialectical 
process is a 'process without a subject' means exactly the same as Hegel's 
fundamental thesis that 'it is crucial to grasp the Absolute not only as 
Substance, but also as Subject': the emergence of a pure subject qua void 
is strictly correlative to the notion of , System' as the self-deployment of 
the object itself with no need for any subjective agent to push it forward 
or to direct it. 
Perhaps what the critics of Hegel's voracity need, then, is a dose of an 
effective laxative. 
