224 / TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

(and they seem all the more irreducible because they are ex-
pressed in an analytic language), they are nevertheless absorbed
in a single intentional movement, that of the shifting of in-
tentionality. Our present difficulty must be set within this
dynamic dialectic. The judgment as such is traversed by an
intentionality toward the object, that is, by an interest in verifi-
cation or a truth claim. The judgment can always be regarded as
a passive bearer (Mit-tréger) of intentionality; in this case,
the judgment is put “out of the circuit” of intentionality, and
all claim to truth is removed from it. Thus it appears that
intentionality itself is what determines a priori that the judg-
ment is to be brought to adequation. The “naive” presupposition
must therefore be constitutively clarified in a subjective a
priori. The truth or falsity of the judgment is indeed inten-
tionally (teleologically) determined. But when the judgment
is considered apart from intentionality (hence from a point of
view which is that of formal analytics), it remains outside of
validity (ausser Geltung ). Formal logic considers the constituted
product rather than the constitution. Thus the true and the false
are determined in themselves by intentionality and will there-
fore be justified (evident) in a subjective thematic. But from
the objective analytic point of view they do not represent
constitutive characteristics of the judgment. Immediate inspec-
tion of the judgment does not disclose them; they are not seen
(angesehen) in the judgment strictly speaking, that of the
evidence of distinctness. As long as the intentionality of the
judgment remains hidden and anonymously exercised, the ideal
telos (truth or falsity) remains undetermined for it. This is a
first, preliminary way of explaining how the judgment can by
its essence (eigenwesentliches) exclude the predicates “true”
and “false” while nevertheless being intentionally true or false.
The analytic point of view in effect brackets the concrete in-
tentionality that makes it effectively possible to determine the
true and the false with respect to the judgment by revealing
their evident reality.

But the judgment can also be regarded as being dynami-
cally integrated in the intentional movement. In this respect it
is a moment of intentionality and effectively participates in it
while by itself partially realizing it. As an integral part of an
ideal dynamic (intentional infinite) whole, it is pre-scribed
eidetically or a priori.’ Hence its telos can be ideally anticipated

8. Since everything, absolutely everything, is eidetically pre-
scribed. Every objectivity, being transcendentally constituted, is
