102 / SCIENCE OF THE IDEA OF SCIENCE
analyses occurs with no collision, as if it were a matter of one
and the same analysis. We are led by formal ontology and the
study of ultimate substrata to the study of experience and of
evidence—that is, to the constituting intentionality of the ego.

By showing this teleological outcome, Husserl at the same
time justifies and motivates transcendental logic by traditional
logic and traditional logic by transcendental logic. This occurs
in two different senses, which are determined by the two di-
mensions of intentional analysis. He motivates transcendental
logic as the intentional telos of traditional logic; and, conversely,
traditional logic is motivated as the factical example is moti-
vated, in the last analysis, by the ideal exemplar, as the em-
bryonic form is justified by the full-blown form.

Hence if Husserlian logic is strictly speaking a Wissen-
schaftslehre—i.e., in virtue of intentional analysis, a genuine
phenomenology of science—it must also be said that it is an
intentional elucidation of formal logic and therefore a phe-
nomenology of formal logic.” Husserlian logic is essentially
both one and the other. This logic is indeed intended to be a
phenomenology of science—a clarification of its meaning and
an elucidation of its pure idea. But it has been preceded in this
investigation by traditional logic, which represents a first ap-
proach to the goal toward which phenomenological logic tends.
It is therefore to be expected that Husserlian logic would inte-
grate this first logic. On the one hand, it does so by maintaining
traditional logic within its proper limits and consequently re-
taining what is valid in it. On the other hand, it does so by
taking it as point of departure for a constitutive exemplary
criticism which is intended to elucidate the latent intentional
sense of its immanent structures and to show its necessary out-
come in a transcendental logic. From this second point of view,
the phenomenology of traditional logic is an essential and inte-
gral part of Husserlian phenomenological logic, since the exem-
plary criticism of the fact is an integral part of the eidetic sci-

17. FTL, pp. 10 f. (g). This is a turn from logic as theory to logi-
cal reason (FTL, p. 267 [236]), i.e., the grounding of logic as ideal-
objective configuration in transcendental subjectivity. It is to be
noted that the intentional analysis of formal logic is twofold, since
formal logic itself is both formal apophantics and formal ontology.
Husserl first subjects traditional logic to criticism, a logic which is
essentially apophantic in orientation (FTL, § 47). He is thereby led
to the tripartite division of formal logic (dreifiltige Schichtung).
Second, in order to arrive at a perfect conception of formal ontology,
Husserl intentionally criticizes formal mathematics (FTL, § 24).
