346 / GENERAL CONCLUSION

therefore be an extrinsic form, i.e., a norm. In the case at hand,
knowledge, in perpetual development, becomes more itself at
each step. The closer it approaches its end idea, the more ade-
quately it realizes its essence, i.e., that which brings it about
that a science is formally a science. This extrinsic form or tran-
scendent in-itself is thus the principle that makes it possible to
measure the essential perfection of each stage of the develop-
ment of knowledge. It is standard, value, and norm. This is
precisely what we render with the word “exemplar”: the telos
conceived as both form (essence) and end can only be an
exemplar. This exemplar is the “itself” of knowledge—its Selbst,
as Husser] says.*

In this way we can understand the peculiar ambiguity of the
idea, which is both intentional immanence and irreal transcend-
ence. The idea is essence or form of the fact. The fact therefore
participates in the idea; that is, the fact intrinsically possesses
a participation in the idea. This is the immanence of the idea.
But the fact itself is not its essence but only has it or participates
in it. The in-itself or essential form of the fact is therefore ex-
ternal to the fact. The idea is therefore transcendent, and conse-
quently it is the measure and a priori norm of the fact. This is a
difficulty the ancients had already encountered. Plato spoke of
the presence and the possession of the idea beside and by the
thing. Aristotle showed that the one is both immanent in and
transcendent to the many which it measures. Being measure,
the one is transcendent; being first term of the multiple series,

1. Science in its ideal state of realization is completely itself
(selbst). This expression is taken from the teleological description
of perception of the object. Husserl shows in EJ how in the real
[réel] process of experience the object is progressively determined
to the point of reaching its “itself.” The terminus at which the
object is then given in itself, as it is in itself, “in the flesh,” is
obviously an ideal terminus. The object given in an originary man-
ner is given “in der Fiille des Selbst” (“in the fullness of self-
sameness”; EJ, p. 267 [321]. It is anticipated as such and constitutes
an idea of reason (EJ, p. 287 [346]). “But the object itself, the
original, is, on its side,...an idea...”; (“Der Gegenstand
selbst aber, das Original, ist seinerseits . . . eine Idee”; EJ, p. 297
[358]). The same is true of the ideal object that is the Sachverhalt
(EJ, pp. 244 [291], 284 [342], 287 f. [346]). We can see the latent
idealism in the ostensibly realistic slogan “zu den Sachen selbst”
(“to the things themselves!” which ties this imperative to rational-
ity and hence to ideality. Cf. S. Bachelard, A Study of Husserl’s
“Formal and Transcendental Logic,” trans. Lester E. Embree (Evans-
ton, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1968), p. xliii.
