The Morphology of Meanings / 143
ence, Ideal-Objektivitdt); but the correlative object (Gegen-
stand) does not exist. This is why we remain on a purely
analytic level with the judgment meaning. In the case of non-
sense, there is neither a meaning nor (a fortiori) a correlative
object (LI, pp. 517 [II/1, 327], 493 f. [II/1, 294 f.]). A proposi-
tion devoid of unitary sense is as such beneath all concordance
or contradiction. It does not look to the object, even the possible
object; and it does not yield a sense, strictly speaking. It is not
a whole, since it has no unitary sense. It is not even a judgment.
As Husserl says, we cannot even “obtain it as possible.” On the
contrary, the judgment that is self-contradictory “has harmony,
in the unity of a ‘sense’; but contradiction and harmony .. .
are mutually exclusive opposites, and it is obvious that they
already presuppose a unity of this ‘sense.’ ” ”

Now we see what the morphology of meanings investigates:
the condition of the possibility of judgments having meaning.
It expresses this condition in the pure formal law of meaning
of the judgment. Only this law makes it possible to set forth
a judgment which has meaning, and it alone guarantees the
meaning of the judgment. It alone makes it possible to avoid
meaninglessness in judgments (Un-sinn). It expresses the ex-
trinsic, exemplary formality of the originary form “S is p.” Since
this is the case, it norms all possible forms of judgments. It ex-
plicates the specificity and the order of the categories of mean-
ing; whatever comes under a certain substantival meaning form
cannot be filled by a meaning of adjectival form, and vice versa.
Hence it is not a question of inquiring after the conditions of
the true judgment or even the laws which govern the com-
possibility of meanings among themselves. In other words, the
pure theory of meaning forms is not occupied with any interest
in possible or actual truth or in the objective validity of the
meanings themselves (LI, p. 493 [II/1, 294]; FTL, p. 50 [44]).
This theory deals only with the meaning value, strictly speak-
ing, of meanings—i.e., the meaning as such—and, more spe-
cifically, with the meaning value of the judgment, the meaning
as such of the judgment.* This meaning of the judgment is
bound in a purely analytic way to the necessary and a priori
forms of the various possible connections of the meanings S
and p. And, as we shall see, these necessary forms are derived
constructively from the absolute exemplary originary form “S is

12. Cf. the way this doctrine is worked out in FTL, § 89.

13. FTL speaks of reine Formenlehre der Urteile (§ 13).
