The Dialectic of the Ideaand the Real / 41
end as the product of constitutive Leistungen. Hence the coming
to reflective awareness (Besinnung), which is both analysis and
constitution, makes an originary constitution out of what is given
to the philosopher as sedimented “habitus” of tradition. Not
only is the idea subjectivized, but even that which corresponds,
in Plato, to the reality of this world here below.

Husserlian phenomenology cannot therefore absolutely re-
fuse to be qualified as “Platonism.” We can easily convince our-
selves of this by reading Husserl himself. To be accused of
Platonism is in his opinion a reproach only so long as Platonism
is taken according to the letter of its historical formulation,
implying therefore a realism of ideas and an externality of ideas
with respect to thought (LI, p. 350 [I]/1, 121]). This point
remains absolutely established and definitive: Husserl’s Plato-
nism is a subjectivized Platonism. But this by no means denies to
Platonism a spirit or direction of thought that is infinitely fruit-
ful.” Indeed, Husserl often regrets that psychologistic empiricism
has prevented this spirit from developing farther. Empiricism
provoked a wave of almost superstitious fear with regard to what-
ever even remotely brought to mind an objectification of the
idea or an ideal objectivity. The latter was condemned a priori
in the name of an instinctive and sterile anti-Platonism. In
Husserl’s eyes, such an attitude long prevented logicians and
theoreticians of science from recognizing the objectivity of ideal
logical forms (truths, judgments, even elaborated sciences) and
consequently shut them off from a sound critique of knowledge.
Husserl’s first objective is accordingly to stem the tide and
unmask this anti-Platonism, which is more emotional than
critical. On the one hand, the fashion was scarcely conducive
to metaphysical speculations in the Platonic style; and, on the
other hand, the reigning empiricism was based on a psychology
which took itself to be the last word of wisdom. On every side the
ideal as object was condemned: either it was simply rejected
under the pretext of anti-Platonism, or it was reduced to psychic
phenomena. Establishing that one can operate (hantieren,
umgehen) with ideal objects was the first breach in this logical
anti-Platonism.* The problem was to find a middle course

22. A spirit from which modern thought to this day draws all its
vitality, whether it admits this or not. In the case of existentialism,
though, we must add the reappearance of Stoic themes.

23. FTL, pp. 81f. (71 f.), 151 (135), 258f. (228f.). It must
not be thought naively that because Husserl condemns a certain anti-
Platonism he is necessarily Platonic. It must simply be understood
