xii / THE IDEA OF PHENOMENOLOGY
Since its publication, he has written extensively on diverse topics
of philosophical interest; but because The Idea of Phenomenol-
ogy marks this author's first appearance in the English language,
a few words of introduction are in order.

André de Muralt does not “do philosophy” in the rather re-
stricted sense this phrase has acquired in the contemporary
Anglo-American idiom. What he does might instead be called
“philosophical history of philosophical ideas.” This distinguishes
him from those who do “philosophical history” of ideas from out-
side the domain of philosophy proper (Hannah Arendt, for ex-
ample, in the sphere of political and ethical thought) and, on
the other hand, from those who do “historical history” of philo-
sophical ideas (Wilhelm Windelband, for example). By philo-
sophical history in general, I mean an account of the “con-
ceptual lineage” of ideas or systems of ideas, a discerning of
the relations between ideas with respect to their content and
their logical order of precedence, apart from the historical se-
quence in which they are introduced and developed. De Muralt’s
ambition is to carry out such “historical” inquiries in the form
of a structural analysis of philosophy, which he regards as a
rigorous philosophical discipline—that is, as a science.

To shed some light on the object and method of this science,
we must introduce the notion of de jure genesis (genése de
droit) which de Muralt elaborates in the present work. De jure
genesis is contrasted with de facto genesis. De facto genesis con-
sists in the emergence and development of an idea or system of
ideas in history and according to a historical sequence. De jure
genesis, on the other hand, consists in the logically sequential
arrangement of ideas or (to shift metaphors) the “topography”
of the “logical space” in which an idea or system of ideas has
its meaning. The “genetic method” to which de Muralt has re-
course is designed to elicit this arrangement and demonstrate
its necessary character. He emphasizes that this method amounts
to one aspect of intentional analysis as it is expounded in Hus-
serl’s works.

De Muralt describes the object of his interest as constants in
philosophy or structures which govern philosophical thought.
Much of his work has been directed primarily to two abiding
philosophical themes: the status of logic and the role it plays
in philosophy, and the relation between the real and the ideal—
together with themes implied by these. He is especially con-
cerned with the problem of the relationship between conscious-
ness and that of which it is conscious in logical operations. (In-
