284 / TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

foundation, intentional analysis therefore grasps the multiple
subjective “how” (quomodo) of the modes of givenness of the
objective—the subjective a priori, the transcendental system of
intentionality which is constitutive of the object. Reflection be-
comes the science of the “how” of the world’s pregivenness. It
elucidates the ultimate subjective foundation that insures every
objectivity its genuine “force.” This science is therefore an
integral part of transcendental phenomenology, which is the
ultimate apodictic and universal science and the source of all
scientific validity (Crisis, pp. 146 f. [149]). So we must see a
second object in the “how.” We saw above that the noema
comprises a noematic multiplicity. The sense is in fact made up
of several objective predicates which determine the one subject
of the sense: the object (= X), which is a priori noematically
determinable. At this point we have therefore discerned a first
object in the “how”: the noematic quomodo of the originary
quid (variable and multiple sense of the object or identical
substrate; Ideas, p. 366 [321]). But this quomodo or noematic
sense is an abstract essence; it is a moment of the complete
noema. The latter must therefore—in order to be able to com-
pletely justify its sense—comprise, in addition, the subjective
modes of its originary givenness, i.e., what may be called, cor-
relatively, the noetic guomodo (Ideas, p. 368 [323]). Correla-
tively with this quomodo of subjective modes of givenness, a
character of greater or lesser intuitive fullness accrues to the
noema, depending on whether the noetic quomodo is brought
out in its synthetic totality or only partially; the noema is
grasped in a more or less clear consciousness, to the limit of
blind obscurity (cf. Ideas, p. 368 [323]). The problem of the
noetic quomodo leads us toward the problem of clear rational
consciousness (according to Ideas, §§ 136-37), i.e., the problem
of evidence (according to FTL, §§ 59-60); and it leads us cor-
relatively toward the problems of intentional and cognitive es-
sences (according to LI, Fifth Investigation, §§ 20-21, and Sixth
Investigation, §§ 25-26).

The complete noema thus appears as in itself intentionally
implying the corresponding noesis, the complete constituted as
implying its constitution, the cogitatum as implying the cogito.
The genuine sense of the noema necessarily requires this im-
plication, without which the noema is not transcendentally
understood. This amounts to saying that only the explicit cor-
relation between noema and noesis is a concrete essence, a
phenomenologically self-sufficient intentional experience. Noesis
