The Second Level of Formal Logic / 183

If a formal logical discipline is worked out at the level of
the symbol (i.e., at the level of mere meaning, independent
of the object meant), it becomes an apophantic mathematics.”
That is, it will be an apophantic analytics worked out on the
model of mathematics, ultimately in itself and independently
of any possible application (cf. FTL, p. 10g [97]). It is conse-
quently a mere intellectual game. In that case we fall into the
error of technization that is brought up in the Crisis, that is,
the loss to a science of its originary sense.** But technization is
truly dangerous only when it is unconscious, when it is in-
voluntarily performed (Crisis, p. 47 [46]). The profound sense
of logic is the interest in the object, a philosophical interest
which may be expressed in two ways: one formal (formal ap-
plication to the object, possible truth by normation) and the
other transcendental (elucidation of the phenomenological ori-
gin of every objectivity). But a logic can be conceived which
would quite consciously and consistently disregard the question
of possible truth and would keep of the logical interest only the
interest in judgments as such and mere relations of consistency
and inconsistency as such. A logic of this kind can then legiti-
mately and freely be developed as a pure formal mathematics
of judgments qua senses. It is legitimate if it consciously
disregards the properly logical interest in application to the
objective domain, i.e., if the logician admits its extralogical
character (aiisserlogische Mathesis). Such a mathesis is outside
the domain of the Wissenschaftslehre. It does not have the
seriousness of a genuine science but is a sort of game, a “mathe-
matics of mathematicians” (FTL, p. 140 [124f.]). It is not
oriented toward “possible domains and a possible knowledge of
them, nor toward possible systematic theories.” It does not have
the theoretical orientation that characterizes logic strictly speak-
ing, and it is not a logic strictly speaking (eigentliche logische
Mathesis pura; cf. FTL, p. 139 [123]). It acquires this orienta-
tion only by being subordinated again to logic as Wissenschafts-
lehre, only if its laws of consistency and inconsistency pure and
simple are transformed into laws of possible material truth—in

15. This is the goal of the perfect development of traditional
logic (FTL, p. 76 [67]).

16. Cf. Crisis, §9(g). Although mathematics is a symbolic
knowledge, it can nevertheless be applied and is therefore not tech-
nized on its own account. Its original sense is therefore a logical
sense (FTL, p. 110 [97]).
