The Definition of Science by theIdea / 61
development at the same time as the development itself. Ex-
perience Als-ob or intuitive presentification is a pure act of
thought, an idealization or ideation; it is an intuitive presentifi-
cation which is the fundamental act of intentional analysis, the
ideal method of anticipatory intellectual intuition. In the first
(descriptive) attitude, this intuition regards the development as
pure flow. But being dissatisfied, it immediately seeks a neces-
sary, permanent, and stable element in terms of which the de-
velopment can be defined. According to the very terms of the
problem thus posed, the definition can only be a definition by
extrinsic denomination. But the development itself, anticipated
in its totality, is obviously the stable element that is sought, all
the more so because it makes it possible to determine exactly
the end of the process. The whole makes it possible to define the
part, but this whole—not being actually realized—is ideally
anticipated in the form of a pure essence, an eidos or idea. The
development is therefore defined by the idealization of its own
totality. This is what is meant by our conclusion that the de-
velopment is defined by the idea. Only in this way does the
development take on meaning. When the totality of the develop-
ment can be visualized as if it were completed, its ideal terminus
is anticipated at the same time, and its meaning and unity are
revealed. The idea thus issues immediately from the develop-
ment as the immediate and determinate idealization of a whole
that is not immediate and not determinate. And this applies to
all cases of development in search of their definition—the de-
velopment of the constitution of the thing as well as the tele-
ological development of science.

In general it is enough to have the part in order to anticipate
the whole and thereby to give an account of the part. It is
enough, for example, to perceive a single conscious experience
“perceptively” in order to see sketched before oneself the pos-
sibility of intuitively continuing the glance to the future series
of experiences, as far as this series may extend. This is a pos-
sibility, an irreality, since only the first experience (because it is
effectively realized) is real. Hence the same principle is always
applied: on the basis of what is currently realized, the realizable
(the potential or possible) is “extrapolated.” For history, this
will be the guiding idea of history; for the sciences in their
current state, it will be the idea of genuine science. This idea
is in each case the idealization of the total development. It is
therefore an intuitive (ideating) grasp of this totality, produced
in the infinite form of the intuitive grasp of an absence of limits
