82 / SCIENCE OF THE IDEA OF SCIENCE
ways. (1) It can be regarded as presupposing real science and
the exemplary criticism of real science, taken as exemplary
point of departure and leading to the idea of science (FTL,
pp. 28 [25], 130 [115]). In this case, logic refers in its very
sense to the effective science whose form or idea it studies. To
be sure, we end with an a priori, i.e., a pure possibility. But this
is a possibility that is motivated and (pre)constituted in real
science. (2) It can be considered simply as a priori, as an
absolute which is given as such, as if it did not have to give
an account of its rights. This is the tendency that has shaped
traditional logic, to the extent of giving it the illusion of being
an absolute which no longer has to be justified but which
imposes itself necessarily. Here too we have an a priori, but
an a priori that is separated from the originary sources of its
own meaning. Such a logic tends to harden progressively, since
it develops only in isolation—independently on the one hand
of any “historical” experience of science, which alone could
intentionally motivate it, and on the other hand of any real
experience, capable of justifying its constitutive concepts. Hence
it leaves itself open to the accusation of arbitrariness which
strikes at all theories von oben her.

Philosophizing von oben her is, for Husserl, equivalent to
philosophizing in the way that dogmatism in general does: by
taking for granted precisely what is in question (cf. FTL, p.
228 [203]). In the matter of evidence and truth, for instance,
a theory von oben her will from the first attribute to certain
particular experiences the privilege of being evident and hence
immediately true. Thus internal experience, the perception of
the ego by itself, may enjoy this privilege. This is the fault with
which Husserl reptoaches Cartesian transcendental realism and
the psychological empiricism which follows this realism—for
which evidence or the feeling of evidence becomes a veritable
epistemological gimmick (FTL, p. 162 [145]; Ideas, p. 400
[354]). Yet if we go beyond this narrow point of view, in which
evidence is reduced to a mere internal experience, we do not
thereby abandon the idea that evidence “must” be an absolute
grasp of being or that there “must” be an absolute experience
without which no knowledge would be possible (FTL, p. 280
[247 f.]; EJ, p. 18 [9 f.]). Similarly, logic is a dogmatic a priori
stand within logic. . . .” Correlatively, the object in general is any
oblects considered logically (formally-generally); cf. FTL, p. 110

go).
