xxii / THE IDEA OF PHENOMENOLOGY
beforehand”—by contrast with the so-to-speak “prescriptive” or
normative sense in which it is generally taken. Similarly, “pro-
blem” brings out the seldom noted origin of the word “problem”
in the Greek xpé + Bdjpa, “that which is thrown before you.”)*
In either case, the reader will do well to heed the hyphen.

Ill
Dr MURALT HAS PROVIDED this work with an invaluable
scholarly apparatus, including copious references to Husserl’s
major writings. For the sake of brevity I have used the following
abbreviations in these references. (Complete publication data
for these and other works appear in the Bibliography at the end
of the book. )

CM: Cartesian Meditations

Crisis: The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental

Phenomenology: An Introduction to Phenomenologi-
cal Philosophy
EJ: Experience and Judgment

FTL: Formal and Transcendental Logic

Ideas: Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology

Idées: Idées directrices pour une phénoménologie

LI: Logical Investigations
References to Idées, Paul Ricoeur’s translation of Ideas, are
more specifically to Ricoeur’s excellent footnotes.

In references to Husserl’s works, the page number of the
English translation is followed in parentheses by the page num-
ber of the German edition listed in the Bibliography. Thus, for
example, “EJ, p. 88 (83)” refers to page 88 of Experience and
Judgment, a passage which is to be found in its original form
on page 83 of the edition of Erfahrung und Urteil published by
Claassen Verlag in 1954.

The Bibliography at the end of this volume appears substan-
tially as it did in its original form. For the reader whose interest
is whetted by the present work, I have added a list of the author’s
publications. Many of these explore themes introduced in The
Idea of Phenomenology. In view of the admittedly inadequate

3. Cf. Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Ele-
ment in Culture (Boston: Beacon Press, 1950), pp. 115, 148, on this
origin and a rather different interpretation of it.
